Final Project for CS379: Drought, Local Institutional Contexts, and Support for Violence in Kenya

In this project, we want to investigate the causal relationship between the prevalence of drought in a district and support for political violence among individuals in that district. Linke et al. (2018) conducted an associational study on survey data collected from districts across Kenya, measuring observed (empirical) drought as well as self-reported levels. The study claims to pro- vide one of the first comprehensive district-level datasets illuminating the potential relationship between climate change and political violence: previous work has either been at the country level or qualitative. They concluded there was a moderate association between levels of support for violence and both observed and reported drought.
We want to investigate their results using causal inference methods. Linke et al. (2018) used an associational framework, leaving them unable to explicitly account for the possible effect of confounding variables unmeasured by the data. With the hypothesis that there is a positive causal effect between self-reported drought levels and an individual’s support for political violence, we estimate the causal effect of drought on support for violence using a strategy known as the framework criterion. We conclude that there is no evidence of a causal effect.

Given our backgrounds, both of us are deeply interested in development policy, and how policymakers can best tackle the roots of social issues. As we are both from countries straddling the equator, the political implications of rising temperatures are especially pertinent to us. As Linke et al. (2018) note, academic studies on the potential links between climate change and levels of violence are becoming increasingly common. As this issue is socially contentious, it is important that researchers are able to demonstrate a mechanism that is specifically causal, as opposed to mere correlation. Causal results allow for stronger claims to be communicated to the public at a time of great need, and better inform policy responses aimed at tackling political violence.
